But now continuing down this path that Brother Morah started us on, Brother Sanderson is going to develop the theme.
Are you ready?
And we'll find out what we're supposed to be ready for in this talk, Brother Sanderson.
And to begin his part, please look at the monitors. There's a short video clip at the beginning of his part.
Are you ready? What you just saw occurred in the Kastroma region on Russia.
The home of a very young couple was raided. And why? Simply because they wanted to worship the only true and living God, Jehovah.
Now, why is this of interest to all of us who are here today? And why is it that we all need to be ready?
Well, Daniel, chapter 11, foretold a rivalry between two kings, the King of the North and the King of the South.
This rivalry has stretched out over thousands of years, and it continues down to our day.
The King of the North has manifested a hatred for God's people. For example, in the 20th century, and particularly during the time of the Second World War, when Nazi Germany was acting then as the King of the North, we remember there was a high concentration of anointed Christians in the area that was being ruled over by Nazi Germany.
Well, how did the King of the North treat them? We remember. They were cruelly persecuted, sent to concentration camps. And as a result of this, as foretold in Daniel chapter 11 and verse 31,
persecution from that German King of the North resulted in the removal of what Daniel 1131 calls the constant feature.
That is, the public preaching activity of God's people was suspended for a period of time. Well, what happened when the Second World War ended?
A new King of the North emerged. And who was that? Well, of course, it was the Soviet Union and its allies.
And they too, cruelly persecuted God's people. They banned our worship of Jehovah. They imprisoned many in work camps and exiled our brothers to Siberia.
But what happened? In time, as Daniel chapter 11 and verse 34 says,
a little help was given. Now, what was that little help that was given? Well, as the Soviet Union collapsed,
bands were lifted across the former territories of the Soviet Union, as well as in other lands that formerly had been a part of the eastern block behind the Iron Curtain.
Well, what happened then? As we well know, the preaching work opened up in that whole region of the earth and hundreds of thousands of honest-hearted ones flocked to Jehovah's organization.
Well, now, brothers, where do we find ourselves now? Well, as Brother Morris so beautifully explained, after prayerful consideration, the governing body believes that Russia and its allies today represent the King of the North.
And that pushing that we are seen between the King of the North and the King of the South through these trade wars and cyber espionage and even through Russia's seizure of neighboring territories such as Crimea demonstrate that we are living at a time when this prophecy is undergoing fulfillment.
Well, is there anything more that the governing body can say at this time about Daniel chapter 11?
Let's consider together the words of Daniel chapter 11 and verse 41. It says, he will also enter into the land of the decoration.
Now, let's stop there. We have long held that the land of the decoration is the spiritual estate of Jehovah's people.
Well, what have we seen over the last approximately 18 months in the country of Russia? Please watch.
On April 20, 2017, Russia's Supreme Court ruled to terminate the activity of all legal entities of Jehovah's witnesses in Russia and to confiscate their property.
On May 25, 2017, Dennis Christensen was the first brother to be arrested following the Supreme Court ban. He has been in detention since then.
After over 20 court sessions, his trial continues. On July 17, 2017, the Supreme Court rejected our appeal against the ban.
On December 14, 2017, authorities broke into the assembly hall in St. Petersburg and took control of the property.
Legal proceedings to seize hundreds of kingdom halls have begun. The branch property is now officially registered in the name of the Russian Federation.
On December 20, 2017, the Leningrad Regional Court upheld an earlier ruling that declared the New World Translation extremist.
And it just continues. Just look at these faces. These are the faces of some of the 71 brothers and sisters who are presently under criminal investigation in Russia.
21 are presently imprisoned. 15 more are under house arrest.
Now, brothers, what can we say about all of these events that have taken place in such a short period of time?
Well, truly, if you're a student of the history of God's organization, you can say these events are unprecedented in our history.
We have never seen a country or a territory with 175,000 witnesses of Jehovah go under ban.
We've not seen such a large branch seized by a government as well as all of our kingdom halls and even declaring the New World Translation extremist.
Well, then based on all of these events, what can we say?
The governing body believes that these and other actions of Russia and its allies constitute a part of the fulfillment of the king of the North entering the land of decoration.
Well, now what can we expect? It would not be surprising if Russia and its allies continue to persecute God's people and that that persecution spreads to other lands.
Already just a little more than one week ago on September 26, 2018, the Supreme Court of the Donetsk People's Republic, that's one of the breakaway republics from Ukraine,
declared the religious association of Jehovah's Witnesses to be extremist.
When our brothers, this raises a very important question.
Does this mean that the attack of Gog of May Gog has begun?
Well, we're not ready to tell you. Pay attention. The annual meeting is not yet over.
By the end of this meeting, you will have the answer to that important question.
But let's come back to our question. Are you ready?
Of course, we want to be ready when persecution comes. And quite frankly, brothers, when ban or opposition comes on a level like we have seen in Russia, there are things that we need to know in order to be ready.
Let's consider four.
The first, we must follow direction from Jehovah's Organization. Hebrews chapter 13 verse 17 says,
be obedient to those taking the lead among you and why?
Because Jehovah will use his appointed channel to provide us with the direction that we need so that we can maintain our spirituality.
And, brothers, it is vital that we adhere to that direction closely in order to preserve our spirituality and the spirituality of others who may worship with us.
Here's the second.
Don't panic. Trust in Jehovah. And don't ban yourself.
Now, what does Deuteronomy chapter 7 and verse 21 tell us about our opposers?
It says, do not be struck with terror because of them.
For Jehovah, your God is with you a great and awe-inspiring God.
You see, our opposers would love for us to panic.
They would love for us to hear the report that 21 of our brothers are in prison and, as a result, become terrified.
They would like for us to stop meeting together, to stop preaching the good news.
In effect, we could actually ban ourselves.
But what does Isaiah chapter 28 and verse 16 say?
It says, no one exercising faith will panic.
So, brothers, we must not panic.
Yes, it's true. There are 21 of our dear brothers and sisters in Russia that are in prison at the present time.
But on the other hand, think about how many tens of thousands of our brothers who are not in prison.
You see, that's what we need to focus our minds on.
And what if we do face arrest or imprisonment because we faithfully serve our God, Jehovah?
Then we must remember that Jehovah will be there to support us.
In fact, I would just love to be able to tell you more.
But our brothers in prison in Russia and many other places are doing just fine.
And why are they doing fine? Because Jehovah God is with them.
There is no prison wall that can be built so high, so wide, or so strong, that it can cut us off from our Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Number three, protect your spiritual food.
Brothers, have a secure place in mind to hide your Bible and other precious spiritual food,
whether in printed or in electronic form.
If you're worshiping Jehovah right now in a country where the work is under ban,
do not leave your spiritual food where it can easily be discovered and taken away.
Number four, at first Peter, chapter 1, and verse 22,
the Bible tells us to love one another intensely from the heart.
And our brothers in countries where the work is under ban or doing just that.
In many court hearings in Russia, our brothers have risked their safety to be in the courtroom to support their brothers.
And when the brothers were charged and when they emerged from the courtroom,
what did those brothers who were there to support them do? Just watch.
Are you determined, brothers and sisters, to be like our brothers and sisters in Russia,
and to stand together as one and support one another through the challenging times that will be coming in the future?
Then remember these practical steps. Follow direction.
Don't panic. Trust in Jehovah and don't ban yourself.
Protect your spiritual food and support your brothers and sisters.
Stand together with them as one.
If we are all determined to do these practical things right now,
then my dear brothers and sisters, you are ready.
Thank you so much, brothers and sisters, and for lighting that fire under us.
In a good way.
And also, thank you so much for removing the veil concerning the King of the North entering the land of the decoration.
But now we'd like to say, if at all possible,
do not go to the restroom during this next talk.
If you do, you're going to really miss something.
So, brother Jeffrey Jackson is going to give us the powerful top now.
They will have to know that I am Jehovah.
So we're all thinking of that very important question.
Has the attack of Gog of May Gog already started?
The simple answer is no. Not yet.
Why can we say that?
Well, if you turn with me again to Daniel chapter 11,
and I'm sure many of us will be turning there in the next few weeks,
thinking over and over again about the significance of these explanations.
You'll notice what is happening now is part of the fulfillment of Daniel 11 verse 40 through 43.
But you'll also notice that it continues on with verses 44 and 45.
Now these two verses apply to something that will occur after the start of the Great Tribulation.
And as we've understood up to now and continue to understand,
the attack of Gog of May Gog does not occur before the outbreak of the Great Tribulation.
In fact, it doesn't even start just as the Great Tribulation commences.
But rather, it is toward the end of the Great Tribulation.
So what do we know about the attack of Gog of May Gog?
What will lead up to that?
Well, let's consider this visual timeline to help us.
Over the centuries, Babel on the Great,
the world empire of false religion,
has committed spiritual immorality with the kings of the earth.
In the near future, these religious leaders could very well have a part in causing people to say
that they have attained a measure of peace and security.
What happens next?
Jehovah will put it into the hearts of the nations to empower the United Nations to attack Babel on the Great.
The Great Tribulation starts at this point.
However, this will not be the attack of Gog of May Gog on God's people.
How do we know?
Jesus said that the days of this initial attack would be cut short on the kind of the chosen ones.
That is, Jesus spurred anointed brothers still on earth.
During all these events,
Jehovah's people will continue to enjoy the spiritual prosperity that they have experienced
ever since pure worship was reestablished in 1919.
But whatever respite we may experience at that time,
will only be the calm before the storm, the final storm.
Our spiritual prosperity will not go unnoticed.
How can it?
All other religious organizations will have been destroyed.
We will be the only ones on this planet who are openly serving God.
Gog of May Gog.
A coalition of all the nations.
Yes, a combination of the King of the North, the King of the South,
and all other nations will make plans to attack God's people.
At that time, we will stand out as different
and will appear to be defenseless.
For this reason, Gog will devise an evil plan in a futile attempt to wipe out pure worship from the earth.
But in his rage, Gog will not take into consideration one vital fact.
His attack on God's people is an attack on Jehovah himself.
What a mistake that will be.
Gog will enrage the sovereign of the universe.
Almighty God.
This will start the battle of Armageddon.
During the war of the great day of God Almighty,
Jehovah will use his heavenly forces.
Included among these will be all of the 144,000
who by that time will have received their heavenly reward.
Then, in a spectacular way,
Jehovah will no doubt unleash both natural and supernatural forces
to protect his loyal servants and eliminate his enemies.
That destruction of the wicked will usher in the thousand-year reign of Jesus Christ.
After the final test at the end of the thousand years,
what will be the situation?
All creation in heaven and on earth will be completely united
in the pure worship of our loving heavenly Father Jehovah.
Hallelujah.
What a time that will be.
We look forward to the time when you're there and you'll say,
this is it.
But in the meantime, as we think to the future
and we realize that God of May, God will attack God's people.
This coalition of all the nations of the earth,
the Kingdom of the North and the Kingdom of the South,
should we dread anything?
Should we be fearful about that?
Well, let's turn to the book of Ezekiel, Ezekiel chapter 38.
And let's read for ourselves the reassurance that we get from these words.
Ezekiel 38, let's start with verses 18 and 19.
On that day, the day when God invades the land of Israel,
declares the sovereign Lord Jehovah,
my great rage will flare up.
In my zeal, in the fire of my fury, I will speak.
And in that day, there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
Then verses 21 through 23.
I will call for a sword against him and all my mountains,
declares the sovereign Lord Jehovah.
Every man's sword will be against his own brother.
I will bring my judgment against him with pestilence and bloodshed,
and I will rain down a torrential downpour and hellstones,
and fire, and sulfur on him, and on his troops,
and on the many peoples with him.
But I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself
and make myself known before the eyes of many nations,
and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.
Aren't those words reassuring?
Yes, Jehovah will turn his rage on God of my God,
because he upholds his name and protects his name people.
So we have nothing to dread.
Over the past few years, you probably noticed that a number of the annual meetings
we've had some clarifications with regard to the prophecy of Ezekiel.
Wouldn't it be nice if we had all those clarifications together in one location?
Well, you'll be pleased to know ten years ago.
In the year 2008, the governing body commission, the writing committee,
to stop preparing a book on the prophecy of Ezekiel.
Of course, in the meantime, the text of the book of Ezekiel was refined and revised,
and many, many things have happened on the world scene.
Do we have to wait another ten years?
I'm not even going to go down that track with you.
You'll be pleased to know that today we're releasing a brand new publication,
the pure worship of Jehovah restored at last.
Now, you all seem very excited about this. All you saw is a front cover.
What can we expect when we open the pages of this new publication?
Well, let's take a sneak preview of what you'll find in this publication.
First of all, you'll be happy to see that it contains all the recent clarifications
that we've had with regard to our understanding of the book of Ezekiel.
And we can say there are a few more clarifications as well in this book,
the pure worship of Jehovah restored at last.
On pages 238 through 240, you will find a summary of clarifications,
so no doubt most of us will be turning their first to read through those.
Numerous charts and timelines appear throughout the book.
The teaching boxes help us gain a deeper understanding of Ezekiel and his writings.
These are designed to help us to get the overall background and setting of these prophecies.
Scattered throughout this book are beautiful illustrations,
illustrations that bring to life the fascinating prophecies that Ezekiel was inspired to record all for our benefit.
As you meditate on these instructive pieces of art,
you will no doubt start to visualize for yourselves the exciting visions
and the amazing things that Ezekiel describes in this prophetic book.
Brother Lett will tell you when you'll receive your copies.
Now I know all of you thinking at this point,
okay, you can go now, we'd like to hear when we're going to get them.
But before we finish this part,
we'd like to mention that in the digital version of this publication, there's a new feature.
There are 22 chapters in the book,
but at the beginning of each chapter, there's a little video clip that introduces the chapter.
And these video clips are presented by either members of the governing body or helpers to the governing body.
Would you like to see a little summary of some of those?
Pure worship of Jehovah, restored at last.
What spiritual gems will we find in this book?
Will there be clarifications of understanding?
Yes.
Will we see beautiful illustrations of vivid prophetic visions?
Yes. The better you understand Bible principles,
the greater will be your desire to reject Satan's traps and to give Jehovah exclusive pure worship.
Why do the faces of a man, a lion, a bowl, and an eagle especially reflect Jehovah's strength and mightiness?
What does the chariot that Ezekiel saw represent?
And how do we know that?
What promises of restoration did Jehovah make through Ezekiel?
And how had they been fulfilled on true Christians during the last days?
What can we learn from Ezekiel's prophecy about Jerusalem's destruction?
How does Ezekiel's vision of the man with the secretaries in corn highlight Jehovah's mercy?
What lies ahead for false religion and what actions should we take now?
Jehovah asked the prophet Ezekiel to do some strange things,
but they conveyed an important message that has meaning for us today.
Do you enjoy picturing yourself and your loved ones in paradise?
A study of Ezekiel's visionary river will help you to make that picture even more vivid.
It's true that understanding Bible prophecy requires humility, hard work, and Holy Spirit,
but the rewards are worth the effort.
The material you're about to discuss will give you courage,
and it will help you to do your part in upholding pure worship.
The better you understand this material, the stronger your determination will be
to give Jehovah pure worship.
We now hope that what you've learned from the pure worship book
will strengthen your determination to give Jehovah what he so richly deserves.
Your exclusive worship.
May this new publication enhance our appreciation for pure worship.
May it continue to build within us a feeling of urgency with regard to the times in which we're living,
and may it help us to have a longing for the time when all creation in heaven and earth
will not only know Jehovah, but love and worship him for all eternity.
What a powerful part, Brother Jackson, and we thank you very much.
And thank you for removing the veil from God,
a coalition of nations including the King of the North and the King of the South.
But now regarding our wonderful publication for the Jackson told you about,
and he put the pressure on me, I gotta give you the right announcement this time.
So here's the right announcement.
The pure worship book in English will be made available on JW.org,
Watchtower Online Library and JW Library on Monday, October the 8th, 2018.
So Monday's gonna be a big day.
If you will be making use of a hard copy of this publication,
one copy of the printed edition will be available after the program at the various annual meeting locations,
including the main lobby of your complex for those watching from their personal rooms.
Additional printed copies may be requested through the congregations,
including the large print edition.
But now we move to our final talk.
And Brother David's plan is gonna give us this comforting talk.
Do not be anxious for I am your God.
And Jehovah knows we need this comforting talk
after the powerful preceding trilogy we just heard.
So Brother's playing, please.
I told some of the brothers that my job is to cheer you up after the preceding talks.
Well, bad things happen.
They happen to us, and they happen to those we love.
So here's the question, is it possible to remain calm
when it seems that our life is being turned upside down?
And the answer is yes.
And let's consider four reasons why we say that.
And this is simple because all of these reasons are contained in one Bible verse,
Isaiah chapter 41 and verse 10.
That's Isaiah chapter 41.
If you can't find Isaiah, try Isaiah chapter 41 verse 10.
Four reasons why we can become.
It says, do not be afraid for I am with you.
Do not be anxious for I am your God.
I will fortify you.
Yes, I will help you.
I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.
You can leave your Bibles open.
We're going to be returning to this book, and we're going to be staying in Isaiah
for the duration of this talk.
Now, more than 100 years after these words were written down,
a very bad thing happened.
The King of Babylon invaded the city of Jerusalem.
And the Bible says of him that he felt no compassion for young man or virgin, old or infirm.
He burned down the house of the true God, tore down the wall of Jerusalem,
burned all its fortified towers with fire, and destroyed everything of value.
Now, there were survivors.
Bear in mind, we're not talking about our friends, Daniel, Ezekiel, Shade Rack,
Meshach and Abednego.
They were already in Babylon, but there were survivors.
But can you picture in your mind's eye what was happening to the survivors?
Just try to picture it.
There they are, bound in chains, being dragged through the rubble,
the smoldering rubble of the Holy City.
Can you see them?
Can you see them pass a widow who is cradling the lifeless body of her only son?
Now a soldier approaches, and he orders the woman to drop her son and get on her feet.
But she can't.
She just can't let go of her son, her precious son, with one stroke, the soldier ends her life.
And those looking on wonder what fate awaits them.
And you can imagine faithful ones among them, repeating the words of Jehovah by means of Isaiah over and over again.
Do not be anxious.
I am your God.
I will fortify you.
I will hold on to you.
Well, those same words have been a source of great encouragement to Jehovah's people throughout the ages,
and they can be a source of strength for us today.
So let's take a closer look at Isaiah chapter 41 and verse 10,
and discuss the four reasons why we needn't be overly anxious when bad things happen.
So keep your Bibles open to Isaiah, and let's look at the first reason.
What does Jehovah say for I am with you?
Now what's the first word in that phrase?
I.
Jehovah doesn't say, don't be anxious because you're a real smart.
You'll figure something out.
No.
We needn't be anxious if Jehovah is with us.
If we put our trust completely in Jehovah, that's the very best way to calm our fears.
And that's been repeated to us during the program of this convention.
And now, isn't Jehovah just interested in the big picture?
Is Jehovah really interested in you and your problems?
Yeah, sure, is the Israelites that he is.
Just turn to Isaiah 43, and notice what he says in verse 2.
He's speaking to you, when you pass through the waters, I will be with you.
And through the rivers, they will not flood over you.
When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched.
Nor will the flame sing you.
Now, Jehovah doesn't say there won't be challenges.
There will be rivers, but Jehovah will not allow those rivers to flood over us.
There will be fire, but Jehovah will not allow the flames to consume us.
Jehovah has the power over fire and water.
And Jehovah says that he will be with us.
So we will leave every trial.
We will go out of every trial with our integrity intact with the help of Jehovah.
But Jehovah does something else.
Jehovah can also help quiet our fears, so that we're not afraid of the trials that be set us.
Now, this was evident in the case of a sister named Yoshiko.
The doctor gave her very bad news.
She had only a few months to live.
But Jehovah was with her.
What did he do? Did he provide a miraculous cure?
No. Her daughter said,
we were impressed with how calm Mom was.
We truly saw that Jehovah gave her inner peace.
Well, I'm sure you could relate many, many experiences where Jehovah has given you that same piece of God that has helped you to endure trials.
Now, let's note the second reason.
Go back to Isaiah 41, 10.
And let's note the second reason why we can remain calm.
He says, do not be anxious for I am your God.
Now, in this verse, the word for be anxious, conveys the thought of looking over your shoulder and expecting trouble,
or being in a constant state of alarm.
Now, is that really helpful?
Reminds me of the American writer Mark Twain.
He said, I'm an old man, and I've known many troubles.
Most of it never happened.
And that's really true, isn't it?
So often, the things that we expect to happen, the things that we worry about, don't happen at all.
What was the point?
Nothing is gained by trying to imagine what a form persecution might take,
or how we might react under a certain trial.
Why?
Because we know our God, and we know what Jehovah can do for us.
How do we know that?
Because of His past record.
We've seen how He has already intervened in our life.
He's done it before, and He can do it again.
Remember the song?
You promised Him in prayer to do His will.
He helped you then, and He will help you still.
And that is so true.
Now, think about the first trial that you encountered when you were coming into the truth.
Maybe it was your relatives.
You were studying, and you were wondering how you were going to break the news to your relatives
that you were studying with Jehovah's Witnesses.
And you begged Jehovah to give you just the right words so that you'd know how to break the news.
It didn't go well.
And you felt as if you were walking through fire.
But did the fire consume you?
Oh, no, look at you. You're here.
Jehovah helped you.
He gave you the peace of God, and He helped you to endure.
And now you have a better relationship with your relatives,
as long as you don't talk about the truth.
He helped you then, and He will help you still.
Well, looking back, you might not see that as a very difficult test,
because since that time you've been through a lot worse.
But it was a test, nevertheless.
And you passed that test successfully.
And so, when you went through much worse later,
you were able to encounter that test and pass it, because your faith was stronger.
Jehovah has built your faith little by little.
Now, Jehovah won't always remove our problems.
If you have a problem, and there's something you can do about it,
then pray for wisdom.
If there's nothing you can do about the problem, pray for peace.
But in any case, pray.
The next best thing to solving a problem is not to be worried about the problem.
Now, let's go back to verse 10, and consider the third assurance that we get from Jehovah.
He says, I will fortify you.
Yes, I will help you.
Now, what does that word fortify mean?
It means to make us stronger.
Now, this morning, we've heard a lot that could be scary on some levels.
And we might catch ourselves saying, I don't think I'd do it very well under persecution.
What's wrong with that statement?
I don't think I would do well under persecution.
Jehovah's not in the picture, and yet he should be.
He says, we have to face persecution alone.
Jehovah says that he is going to fortify us.
He is going to give us the inner strength that we didn't know we had
because we don't have it if we're not facing persecution.
You may not be strong enough to encounter persecution now if you're not going through it.
But when the time comes, and it will come, Jehovah will give you the strength you need.
He says, I will fortify you.
I will make you strong.
Well, let's consider the last phrase in verse 10.
Jehovah says, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.
Now, the watchtower of July 2016 clarified this verse for us.
We used to often think of ourselves walking hand in hand with Jehovah.
But that's not really what he's talking about.
How do we know?
Well, it's because of what he says in verse 13.
It says, for I, Jehovah, your God, am grasping your right hand.
But what does he say at the end of verse 10?
I will hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.
If we were walking side by side with Jehovah, our right hand would be in his left hand.
Our left hand would be in his right hand.
But he says, no, I will hold on to you with my right hand and I will hold on to your right hand.
So what is the picture?
You're down and you can't get up.
And Jehovah God extends his right hand.
And what do you do?
Don't just lie there.
Extend your right hand.
Allow Jehovah to help you to get up.
Maybe you're battling depression right now.
Or perhaps you've lost a cherished privilege of service and you just can't get over it.
Extend your right hand and allow Jehovah to help you.
Maybe he'll use an elder as his right hand man.
But he's going to use somebody to help you if only you are willing to accept the help that Jehovah will give.
Well, there they are.
For reasons why we can keep calm, no matter what the future holds.
Jehovah says, I am with you.
He says, I am your God.
I will fortify you and I will hold on to you with my right hand.
What a beautiful assurance that is.
And we're going to have a whole year to consider these words in depth.
Because part of this text, as you have probably guessed,
constitutes our year text for the year 2019.
And here it is, do not be anxious for I am your God.
Thank you so much, Brothers Plain, for that balsam of Gilead.
And also we appreciate that year text, Isaiah 4110,
but a beautiful scripture will focus on during 2019.
But now I've been apportioned five minutes for some concluding comments.
And even though we're over time, I'm going to take my five minutes.
I'll probably hear about it later though from the governing body.
So if I leave out of here real quick after the program,
you'll know what the problem is.
But near the beginning of our program,
we focus just for a few minutes on appreciating our spiritual paradise.
And to substantiate how truly parodisec it is,
we made comparisons between that original paradise,
our spiritual paradise.
And we discussed seven similarities.
Now just to review,
our spiritual paradise, like the Garden of Eden, exists on a land.
It is filled with beautiful plants and trees.
It has abundant food and refreshing water.
It has many harmless animals.
It needs maintenance and it has boundaries.
But just briefly, let's discuss one more,
an eighth similarity.
Our spiritual paradise is expanding to embrace more and more people.
Originally, Jehovah intended the Garden of Eden to expand, didn't he?
We know that Jehovah told him,
and Genesis 128 become fruitful,
become many.
Fill the earth and subdue it.
So as Adam and Eve had children,
as their children had children,
the Garden of Eden would become too small eventually,
it would have to grow.
It would have to expand, bigger and bigger.
And finally, the east would meet the west,
the north would meet the south,
the planet earth would become the Garden of Eden.
But now we know that original procedure,
Jehovah had in mind,
you could say was blocked by the rebellion in the Garden of Eden.
Of course, Jehovah's original purpose,
for the earth to be a paradise like the Garden of Eden,
certainly will be accomplished.
But now, here is the point.
Just as Jehovah intended the Garden of Eden to expand,
he desires our spiritual paradise to expand,
to embrace more and more people.
And that definitely is happening, isn't it?
As all of us focus on making disciples,
and right now our spiritual paradise embraces
some eight and a half million sheep-like individuals.
And only Jehovah knows how many more will come into it
before the Great Tribulation begins
as all of us do our best to make disciples.
And Jehovah expects us to do that,
to do our very best to expand this spiritual paradise,
this wonderful, beautiful place where we are.
And this will happen until we know the spiritual paradise
will go through the Great Tribulation,
and then resurrected ones and ones born in the New World
will come into the spiritual paradise
if they exercise faith in Jehovah's provisions.
But there'll be many, it'll do that.
They'll come into the spiritual paradise that will happen
over and over again until the spiritual paradise
will cover the entire planet and this exquisite paradise
will actually be more beautiful, more exquisite
than the literal paradise that will coexist with it.
So there we have eight similarities between
the original paradise, our spiritual paradise.
And we never want to take it for granted.
And as we touched on a little bit in the beginning,
we never want to allow Satan to do what he did to Adam and Eve.
He got them out of their wonderful place, didn't he?
Well, he's trying to lure us out of the boundaries
of our wonderful exquisite spiritual paradise,
but we are not going to let him do this.
And we're determined we're going to help others
that are of honest heart, join us in this spiritual paradise.
And this wonderful annual meeting has truly helped us
in this regard. I know all of us are so happy we were here.
Now there's many things you could do on a Saturday,
but we did the best thing we could have done on this Saturday.
We were here at this wonderful annual meeting.